docs: add subscribeBlockStream protocol reference (#3055)
hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node: docs/design/communication-protocol/subscribe-block-stream.md

| First-available to fixed end   |     `uint64_max`     |         M          | Stream from `first_available_block` through block M    |
| From fixed start, indefinitely |          N           |    `uint64_max`    | Stream from block N forward, indefinitely              |
| Bounded range                  |          N           |      M (≥ N)       | Stream blocks N through M inclusive                    |

The request is rejected with `INVALID_END_BLOCK_NUMBER` if a specific (non-sentinel) `end_block_number` is less than `start_block_number`.

## Response stream structure

Each `SubscribeStreamResponse` carries exactly one of three variants:

**`block_items`** — a `BlockItemSet` containing one or more `BlockItem`s from the same block. A large block is split across multiple consecutive `block_items` messages. The following ordering invariants apply across those messages:

- A `BlockItemSet` SHALL NOT span more than one block.
- The `BlockHeader` appears exactly once per block, in the first `block_items` message for that block, and MUST be the first item in that set.

> - The `BlockProof` appears exactly once per block, in the last `block_items` message for that block, and MUST be the last item in that set.

Reviewer: This is no longer true.
Any given block may contain multiple block proof items, and those items will always be _after_ the BlockFooter.
There is always exactly one BlockFooter, and it is the last non-proof block item.

> - All `block_items` messages between the header and proof carry intermediate block items with no header or proof.

Reviewer: Better to say "between header and footer", as there may be multiple proof items.

> When reassembling a block from the stream, a new block begins on each `BlockHeader` and is complete when the corresponding `BlockProof` is received and confirmed by the subsequent `end_of_block` message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When reassembling a block from the stream, a new block begins on each `BlockHeader`, is complete when the corresponding `BlockFooter` is received, is followed by one or more `BlockProof` items, and terminated by a single `end_of_block` message.
```

**`end_of_block`** — a `BlockEnd` message carrying the `block_number` of the completed block. The Block Node sends exactly one `end_of_block` per block, emitted immediately after all `block_items` for that block. The message immediately following a `BlockEnd` is either a new `block_items` starting with a `BlockHeader`, or the terminal `status`.

**`status`** — a `Code` value that terminates the stream. This is always the last message. Subscribers MUST NOT expect any further messages after receiving `status`.

For a bounded request (blocks N through M), the message sequence is:

```
block_items...  end_of_block(N)
block_items...  end_of_block(N+1)
...
block_items...  end_of_block(M)
status(SUCCESS)
```

> For an indefinite request (`end_block_number` = `uint64_max`) the `status` message is sent only when the stream is closed by an error or a Block Node shutdown.

Reviewer: We include the possibility for the Block Node to limit connection duration in the subscribe protocol as well. This is not _currently_ implemented but is supported and permitted. A request that has reached maximum stream limits will end with `status(SUCCESS)`.
```suggestion
For an indefinite request (`end_block_number` = `uint64_max`) the `status` message is sent only when the stream is closed by an error, the Block Node shuts down, or when the stream reaches maximum connection duration (typically around 600,000 blocks, if enabled).
```

### Base protocol diagram

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Subscriber
    participant BlockNode

    Subscriber->>BlockNode: serverStatus()
    BlockNode-->>Subscriber: ServerStatusResponse(first=F, last=L)
    Note over Subscriber: Choose start block N in range F to L + maximumFutureRequest

    Subscriber->>BlockNode: subscribeBlockStream(start=N, end=M)
    Note over BlockNode: Validate request; check future-block constraint

    loop For each block in N to M
        loop One or more BlockItemSet messages per block
            BlockNode-->>Subscriber: block_items(BlockItemSet)
        end
        BlockNode-->>Subscriber: end_of_block(BlockEnd with block_number)
        Note over Subscriber: Block complete; increment expected block number
    end

    BlockNode-->>Subscriber: status(SUCCESS)
```

## Streaming modes

### Historical streaming

In bounded-range mode (`start_block_number` = N, `end_block_number` = M where M ≥ N) the Block Node reads the requested blocks from persistent storage. The stream ends with `status(SUCCESS)` once block M has been fully delivered.

> If a block in the requested range is not found in storage, the Block Node closes the stream with `NOT_AVAILABLE`.

Reviewer: This is not correct.  If the range extends beyond the latest available block, the block node will continue to deliver blocks from the _live stream_ until the end block number is reached (see [comment here](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node/blob/main/block-node/stream-subscriber/src/main/java/org/hiero/block/node/stream/subscriber/BlockStreamSubscriberSession.java#L416)).

If the _first_ requested block is in the future, then the request is still accepted as long as the value is not too far in the future, limited by the `maximumFutureRequest` configuration which defaults to 4,000 blocks.

### Live streaming

In live-only mode (both fields = `uint64_max`) the Block Node attaches the subscriber to the live block queue and begins delivery from the next complete block it receives. No historical blocks are delivered. If the Block Node is mid-block at connection time, delivery begins after that block completes.

### Hybrid streaming

In from-start-indefinite mode (`start_block_number` = N, `end_block_number` = `uint64_max`) the Block Node first delivers historical blocks from N up to the latest persisted block, then transitions seamlessly to the live queue. The subscriber receives a single continuous stream with no gap at the transition.

This is the most common pattern for Mirror Nodes, which require a contiguous block history from a known checkpoint through the current tip and onward.

> > **Note:** The Block Node maintains a live-block queue per session. If a subscriber processes historical blocks more slowly than the Block Node receives new live blocks, older live-queue entries may be dropped to prevent the queue from filling. Dropped entries are not lost: the Block Node re-reads those blocks from persistent storage when the historical phase catches up to them.

Reviewer: We should add another note that blocks streamed from the live stream _are not verified, may contain errors, may be repeated, and may be incomplete_. The receiver is responsible for handling these conditions and is encouraged to verify each block using all attached `BlockProof`s.

```

## Future-block constraint

The Block Node enforces a limit on how far ahead of the current tip a `start_block_number` may be. A request whose `start_block_number` is more than `subscriber.maximumFutureRequest` blocks ahead of the latest known block is rejected immediately with `NOT_AVAILABLE`. Call `serverStatus` first to find the current `last_available_block`, then choose a `start_block_number` within the permitted window.

The `subscriber.maximumFutureRequest` configuration key controls this limit:

| Config key                        |        Default |     Minimum |
|:----------------------------------|---------------:|------------:|
| `subscriber.maximumFutureRequest` | `4,000` blocks | `10` blocks |

A request for a start block within the permitted future window but not yet produced will be held — the Block Node waits for that block to arrive on the live stream before beginning delivery.

> **Note:** `NOT_AVAILABLE` (not `INVALID_START_BLOCK_NUMBER`) is returned when `start_block_number` is too far ahead of the current tip. `INVALID_START_BLOCK_NUMBER` is returned only when `start_block_number` is below `first_available_block` or is otherwise structurally invalid.

> ## Error codes

Reviewer: Not all are errors:

```suggestion
## Result Codes
```

| `INVALID_START_BLOCK_NUMBER` |   4   | `start_block_number` is below `first_available_block` or is otherwise invalid                                                    | Call `serverStatus`; correct `start_block_number`; retry                              |
| `INVALID_END_BLOCK_NUMBER`   |   5   | `end_block_number` is less than `start_block_number`                                                                             | Correct `end_block_number`; retry                                                     |
| `NOT_AVAILABLE`              |   6   | `start_block_number` exceeds the future-block limit, a required block is absent from storage, or the Block Node is shutting down | Call `serverStatus`; adjust the block range; retry with exponential back-off          |

When the Block Node shuts down gracefully it closes each open session with `status(SUCCESS)`. New connection attempts received during shutdown are immediately closed with `NOT_AVAILABLE`.

> Because `SUCCESS` does not imply all requested blocks were delivered (orderly shutdown is also reported as `SUCCESS`), subscribers MUST NOT assume delivery is complete on receiving `SUCCESS` for an indefinite or partially-delivered stream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because `SUCCESS` does not imply all requested blocks were delivered (orderly shutdown and connection limit are also reported as `SUCCESS`), subscribers MUST NOT assume delivery is complete on receiving `SUCCESS` for an indefinite or partially-delivered stream.
```

    else Block Node internal error mid-stream
        Subscriber->>BlockNode: subscribeBlockStream(start=N, end=uint64_max)
        loop Blocks delivered before error
            BlockNode-->>Subscriber: block_items + end_of_block (blocks N through L)
        end
        BlockNode-->>Subscriber: status(ERROR)
        Note over Subscriber: Reconnect from block L+1; retry with exponential back-off
    else Orderly Block Node shutdown with partial delivery
        loop Blocks delivered before shutdown
            BlockNode-->>Subscriber: block_items + end_of_block (blocks N through K)
        end
        BlockNode-->>Subscriber: status(SUCCESS)
        Note over Subscriber: Reconnect from block K+1; call serverStatus on another Block Node if needed
    end
```

## Reconnection and gap handling

If the stream closes for any reason, the subscriber SHOULD:

1. Record the `block_number` from the last `end_of_block` message received. Use `block_number + 1` as `start_block_number` for the next request. If no `end_of_block` was received before the stream closed, reconnect using the original `start_block_number`.

> 2. Call `serverStatus` to confirm the new start block is within the available range on the target Block Node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Call `serverStatus` to confirm the new start block is within the available range on the target Block Node or not overly far in the future.
```

3. Issue a new `subscribeBlockStream` request from that start block, applying exponential back-off if consecutive attempts fail.

> 4. Consider falling back to a different Block Node if errors on the primary persist.

Reviewer: I would recommend swapping these.

```suggestion
4. Switch to a different Block Node and issue a new `subscribeBlockStream` request from that start block.
3. Apply exponential back-off if consecutive attempts fail across multiple Block Nodes.
```

> The Block Node streams blocks in strict ascending order with no gaps within a session. If a block in the requested range cannot be provided mid-stream (for example because it was pruned from storage after the request was accepted), the Block Node closes the stream with `NOT_AVAILABLE`. On receiving `NOT_AVAILABLE` mid-stream, call `serverStatus` and reconnect from the earliest block that covers the needed range, potentially from a different Block Node.

Reviewer: Slightly incorrect.

```suggestion
The Block Node makes a reasonable effort to stream blocks in strict ascending order with no gaps within a session, but some exceptions may occur, particularly for "live" blocks. If a block in the requested range cannot be provided mid-stream (for example because it was pruned from storage after the request was accepted), the Block Node closes the stream with `NOT_AVAILABLE`. On receiving `NOT_AVAILABLE` mid-stream, call `serverStatus` and reconnect from the earliest block that covers the needed range, potentially from a different Block Node.
```
